Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes. And today
I'm talking with Mark Durden
who runs the key man
project, and you can check
it out@keyman.com. Where are you
calling from? I'm calling from
Phnom Penh. Cambodia. All right.
And, but you don't have
a Cambodian accent say No,
I'm an Australian working there,
basically running a software team
out of Phnom Penh. And
how long has key man
been, been run? So I
wrote the first version of
Kamen back in 1992, I
think when I was about
14 years old. Seriously. Yeah.
So I was, I was
living in Laos at that
point with my parents. And
you, this is like, what
does that now? 26 years.
Yes. It's a very long
time. Where did you think
that this would be an
open source project you would
be working on for basically
your entire life? No, I
didn't have any idea of
that at the time. So
the, there was a specific
need that my father had
back in 1992. So it
was not long after the
release of windows 3.1 and
true type fonts. And this
was like magic because we
could all of a sudden
write the last script. And
I don't know if you
do you know anything about
the last script? So, so
the last script doesn't look
very much like Latin script
for use in English. It
has marks vowels that go
above and below and to
the left and to the
right of the base character.
Is it a syllabary? It's
not, it's, it's technically an
alphabet because everything is written,
but it's, it's related to
a lot of the Indian
languages in the way that
it's written In 1982. How
would one write this? So
in 1992, there was really
no good way to type
Lao in windows. So people
had made fonts where they
replaced the English characters with
Lao characters. So you press
the T key press letter
T and instead of coming
out with an English that
a T it would come
up with a allow letter,
but it would actually be
stored as an letter T
in your document. Oh, wow.
Okay. So you would open
up a text file and
it would just look like
a bunch of random Latin
letters, but if you applied
the font, you'd be looking
through it through a different
set of lenses. Yeah, that's
correct. And that kind of
works until you want to
do, you know, two languages
in one text document or
a text field at a
database. And if you want
to do any kind of
ligatures or have fonts, but
up against each other and
attach, that becomes challenging. If
not impossible. Cool. You can't
do anything smart with the
fonts. No. And is this
before Unicode kind of got
together and made all of
the different, you know, unique
code names for all the
different characters? Yeah. So this
is, this is still in
the days of code pages.
So 256 characters of which
about what 64 of them
are non grata really. Hmm.
And I understand that when
Lao alphabet was added into
Unicode, there's even a permanent
error in Unicode with regards
to two different names for
characters in Lao. Yes. I
believe I actually reported that
one. So there was two,
two of the names to
the letters had their names
swapped. It's it's a bit
awkward, but you can, you
can still use the letters.
Yeah. I assume that this
is hidden from the, to
the typist. Yeah. They don't
see it in day to
day use only the, the
font geeks. See it when
they're trying to do their
new fonts and the Unico
geeks. So you're 14 and
you want to type loud.
So you start writing C
and C plus plus. Yeah.
So the, the basic thing
we wanted to do is
we wanted to shift the
Lao alphabet into the upper
esky section above one 28
and in practice above one
60, because that range from
one 28, two one five
nine is, is dodgy fee
for general use. So that
means we, we lose lost
the characters that were up
there, which were the European
extended esky with letters, with
diacritics and some currency symbols
and things like that. But
that didn't really impact a
lot of what we were
doing. But the problem is
that we didn't have a
way to actually key those
symbols once we actually move
them up there. So I
got hold of a windows
SDK. We probably shouldn't talk
too much about how legitimate
that was in those days
and didn't have access to
any documentation or MSDN CDs
or anything like that. So
I worked from the head
of files being a 14
year old with lots of
time and, and figured out
how to create a hook,
a application, or a hook,
a DLL that would capture
the keystrokes and allow me
to spit out whichever character
I wanted. And were you
already a computer person at
this point? So I was
highly interested in computers. I
think if my parents hadn't
restricted me, I probably would
have spent most of my
awake time playing with the
computer. So this initially was
the, was the intersection of
your interest in language, your
interest in the country you're
living in and a problem
that was as of then
unsolved? Yeah. You know, I,
I wrote computer games before
that just like most teenage
computer programmers. Yeah. So you,
you, you wrote this as
a, as a, a windows
app itself, or did it
hook in and look like
part of windows? It was
a windows app and there
weren't really any hooks in
windows to LA to control
the keyboard layout at that
point. So it was a
separate app that ran, it
actually showed a little icon
in the title bar of
the active application. And you
could click on that icon
to switch between English and
Lau. Had you intended that
this would be English and
then N number of other
languages, or was it just
a matter of solving the
problem for Lau? So initially
it was just loud. It
was fairly hard coded, and
it was fairly hanky, but
wasn't very long after we
wrote, after I wrote the
first version, we had some
visitors and they saw this
program and they said, Oh,
we can definitely use this
for such and such a
language in, in Thailand. And
like, I don't remember what
language it was now. And
so that meant I had
to rewrite it to make
it so that they could
define the, the table for
mapping the keyboard. So I
wrote, came in version two
and they took that away
and they started using it
for a number of languages
in, in Southeast Asia. And
this, this where people with
the organization that I work
with now, which is a
SIL summer Institute of linguistics.
Hmm. And so at that
point, it wasn't an open
source project. I don't think
I'd heard of open source.
I, but it was a
free project. So the software
was completely free of charge.
And had you thought about
this other than just, it
was a hobby and it
was helpful to people, and
again, you said you're a
teenager, so you have all
the time in the world.
That's right. So I was
homeschooled. So I was very
flexible on my hours and
I just like to make
something that help people. And
at what point though, did
this turn into what is
now, how many keyboards? So
now we have over 700
different keyboards on the website,
I'm covering over a thousand
different languages. Wow. Did, did,
is this something where you
were, have been working on
this kind of more or
less full time for the
last 26 years? Or was
there any downtime where you
were doing this and then
went off to university and
then came back and people
were still using it? Okay.
So around about 1996, I
went to university before I
left Laos. I'd never actually
used the internet. So I
had no idea about it.
The internet was illegal in
Laos in those days. Wow.
Okay. So I came to
Tasmania in Australia for university.
And one of the things
I discovered when I started
university was that I actually
needed money to live. This
was a bit of a
shock. So I had to
get some work. And then
I realized that I could
sell licenses of Cayman and
actually make money and actually
keep working on it. So
I had had a challenge
for a while of what
can I make enough money
to, to actually work on,
came in. And that was
attention, I guess, for the,
until 2015 or so. So
the selling licenses of software.
So did you turn that
into your own company or
did you license it to
a company? So I turned
it into my own company
and I ran it pretty
much part time until about
2010 or so. And then
from 2010 through to 2015,
I was running the company
full time, but the software
never made a profit itself.
Okay. So this is, this
is like, as you know,
people who are farming for
subsistence, this is subsistence coding
at this point. It is.
Yeah. And, and, you know,
you do contract work and
that kind of thing, and
that brings enough money into
do the thing that you're
passionate about and that, that
works. But it does take,
take a bit out of
your life, out of your
family after a while. Yeah,
indeed. And did, when did
they start enlisting volunteers in
making this pluggable? So you
went from one keyboard to
thousands. So that really happened
when I made the, the
keyboard language for designing a
keyboard layout back in version
two of Cayman. It exploded
at that point and back
in 1993 or 1994. So
that was all distributed by
it really in Southeast Asia.
And then throughout into the
U S I don't know
how it was distributed for
the rest of the world.
And by flopping out, you're
literally saying enthusiastic people tell
their friends, and then they
meet up and copy floppies
in basement somewhere. Pretty much
a SIL did take it
on as a project that
they wanted to use for
very early on, back in
1994, 95. And so a
lot of their, that they
had a distribution of software
back in those days when
you sent out CDs to
people. And so that's, it'd
be on their CDs. And
what does SIL S I
L is summer Institute of
linguistics. So we're an organization
that works in literacy and
language development and Bible translation.
So it's a Christian organization
and work with minority languages
around the world. So then
they made this possible that
you went from a free
thing that you do as
a hobby to a subsistence
company. And now you are
supported by this nonprofit, Basically.
Yes. So I sold, sold
licenses of key man to
a large number of organizations.
People like BBC world service,
they work in a lot
of different languages. So back
in 2001 or so, they
were working in 70 different
languages. So they had a
big need for being able
to control the way they,
they type things and not
necessarily using even the system
supplied input methods, because they
have people who are coming
from very mixed areas where
they didn't actually have, you
know, consistent knowledge on how
to use the computer. And
people had to design their
own systems, but they needed
a single system in their
studios And making it available
to everyone though, which is
a kind of a game
changer. Because when, when, when
I was gambling with different
languages 20 years ago, I
was looking at Ethiopic scripts,
Amharic degree. Yeah. And I
would use a tool called
Gus pro G E apostrophe,
easy pro. And it was
like $59 or whatever. And
there's a whole, I mean,
for every language you're interested
in, there's someone out there
who has a product for,
you know, only $79 that
you could install and then
use the language, you know,
that you are interested in
by making key man available
to everyone. It kind of
disrupted the industry, wouldn't it?
So the first disruptor of
the industry was actually Microsoft
keyboard layout creator, because that
made it possible for anyone
to create a windows keyboard
for free. So at that
point, I actually thought, Oh,
well, this is the end
of Cayman because there won't
be enough money left in
it for me to keep
working on it. But the
Kamen does a number of
things that windows keyboards can't
do. And it turns out
that for a lot of
languages, those things actually really
helpful. So a windows keyboard,
if you, if you're familiar
with how they work, if
you look at English, you
know, you press the Tiki
and the T comes out,
it seems pretty straight forward.
But even there, we've got
a whole bunch of things
that are hidden from view.
So if you look at
the key caps on your
English keyboard, you can see
a capital T, but you
can't see a lowercase T
somebody who's not familiar with
the Latin script has a
great deal of trouble using
that. Cause psychology find the
letters that they can see
written down if they want
to type in microsoft.com. Well,
where's that little line with
a dot above the eye.
It's not on the keyboard.
That is a really interesting
exercise in empathy. Yeah. It's,
it's actually so hard to
actually step into that world
of, Oh, you know, how
do I use my language
on a computer? Because we're
so surrounded as English speakers,
by everything being in English,
it's like, go, go to
the Russian web for a
few days and, and try
and get anything done. Yeah.
I'm looking at the, I'm
looking at the EA and
realizing how different it capital
E is from a lowercase
E to the point where
if you're just learning English,
you are effectively completely blocked.
Yeah. Wow. Okay. So Microsoft
keyboard layout creator came out
in 2007. So a little
over the 10 years from
now. And you realize that
while that was a bit
of a disruptor, it wasn't
a cough, a nail in
the coffin for key man.
It wasn't. And partly because
at about the same time
I created a web version
of Kamen. So Jarvis scripted,
you know, with internet Explorer,
six things about around that
time too had actually, you
know, matured enough to the
point that you could create
a onscreen virtual keyboard and
do the same things on
the web as you were
doing on a keyboard programming
windows. And that sold to
a number of organizations that
were wanting to do web
based virtual keyboard in their
websites. And that kept me
going And did, did aren't
the fonts though that you
need, like, not always available.
I remember in the last
five, 10 years, it just
feels like suddenly the fonts
I need are available while
a couple of just a
couple of years back, I
was still downloading fonts on
a per language basis. Yes.
It was always difficult. So
internet Explorer kind of solved
the embedded font problem in
some ways with the embedded
open type EOT font format.
But they were so hamstrung
by the, all of the
copyright issues that they, that
the format was very locked
down. So it was very
difficult to create an IOT
font and it was only
ever worked in internet Explorer.
So you would find that
some websites would embed those
fonts. Others would just have
a, if you see square
boxes, click this button to
download a font, a message,
And did this quietly just
go away because different operating
systems woke up or because
people started creating open fonts
and then we are able
to seamlessly download them or
get the browsers start embedding
them. Like right now I'm
typing Lao in key man
web.com. And I don't remember
ever installing any of that.
So it's a mixture of
things. Windows 10 has a
very large range of fonts
by default, you know, for
a lot of the languages,
it's got a single font
for large languages. It has
a nice collection. And so
that means that, you know,
if you're using windows 10,
then you're going to cover
a lot of those languages.
But if you go to
a language like Chuck Marr,
you're probably going to see
square boxes.  Where is
that language from Chuck Maya's
Asian language Bangladesh. I think
I've got fans. You've got
fans. Yay. Yeah. I'm on
windows 10 insiders and it
looks very swirly and circley
Ah, you've got an embedded
font. There you go. I
have, we have switched on
the embedded fund. Oh, lovely.
So I don't have those
fonts, but I do because
they are embedded in the
browser. Yeah. Or you can
test that by copying and
pasting into notepad. Yeah, you're
right. I just copied it
into note pad and I
got question marks. So that
is an it more of
a, for lack of a
better word, obscure a font
it's It's less recently supported
by. Yeah. So it's actually
an active development right now.
Okay. Interesting. Yeah. I want
to be respectful of what
the right, what the right
language is to use when
referring to these things, because
we can use words like
niche or minority languages, but
what does that really mean?
It just means that there's
not millions and millions of
people and that have heard
of it, but it's still
either actively used in written
languages. Yeah, that's right. So
I don't, I actually don't
know how many people speak.
Chakma it's just one that
I was been in, in
recent development. So I was
quite aware of it. So
key man on the web
and key man on a
windows, and they'll also Mac
and Android, is this sharing
the same core engine or
is this the same thing
written multiple times? It's the
same thing written multiple times.
There are some shared, there
is some shared functionality. So
the iOS, Android, and web
actually all share the JavaScript
engine. And that's actually kind
of cool. There's a reason
for that. Is that on
iOS, you weren't allowed to
write a, an interpreter. So
Apple's app store rules said
you couldn't write a, an
interpreter. And so we figured
that given that came keyboards
are effectively a programming language
for a software program that
the be good chance would
be have our app projected
at some point, if we
tried to write it and
you interpreted for those keyboards,
But then when, when Apple
iOS eight came out where
you could have system-wide keyboards,
that gives you the opportunity
to jump in in a
much, very, in a very
legitimate way and write your
own keyboard. But then how
do you support fonts for
languages that Apple doesn't support?
How do you render something
like that? Apple that there's
two halves to that story.
One is the actual letter
shapes themselves. And the other
one is the, the rendering
engine that takes the letter
shapes and puts them together
in the right order and
in the right place. So
the render, we have very
little control over because it's
very deep in the system,
but we can install fonts.
So for about probably 90%
of the languages that we
work with, apples renderer already
copes with the, with the
shapes, even if they don't
supply a font. So, and
there is a way because
we can install a font.
That means that we can
actually do what we need
to, to use that language
on iOS. Interesting. And do
you have telemetry or ways
to tell that people are
using this? I mean, are
there any languages that you
support where you legitimately don't
know if anyone's even using
it, but it was important
to do because you wanted
to do it. So Almost
every single keyboard that's out
there was submitted by somebody
else, not by me. So
it was maybe 10% of
them were ones that I
created and other ones that
I was working with, and
most of the time, those
ones were keyboards, where I
was working with somebody else
who had a need. And
then I created the keyboard
for them. There's the keyboard
aspect, which is the input,
there's the rendering of the
cliff. But then for, also
for languages that have diacritical
marks and things, where there
is multiple keystrokes to get
a thing like Ooredoo, for
example, you type something and
then hit space and then
it fundamentally changes something else
that is that swapping Unicode
lifts out for different things.
Is that, is there an
engine because that's not just
like, like ethnocentric, monolingual, people,
people who speak just English,
they are used to typing
one key and one thing
happens. And the only time
any kind of cording comes
along is when you hit
shift and something else. But
the idea that you type
three, four, or five characters
and then hit space and
then something totally different happens.
It's very kind of lack
of a better word foreign
to them. Yeah. I'm curious
what magic is going on
there because it's more than
just a visual keyboard and
it's more than just font
rendering. That's right. Yeah. So
that's kind of where came
in the power of Keevon
comes in and where it
moves beyond what ms. Kelsey
can do, for example. So
what we have in Cayman
is what we call contextual
input. So we look at
what's already in the tech
store or on screen for
the more visual description. And
then we combine that along
with a keystroke and transform
what's already on screen with
that key stroke into an
output. So for instance, if
you have an a, and
then you type combining acute
Mark, it may, instead of
having two characters in a,
and a combining acute character,
actually remove the, a from
the tech store and put
in an a with combining
an acute or a with
acute as a single character,
You have to keep that
stack around though, because presumably
then when I hit backspace,
I don't mean to remove
the character. I need to
back up the thing I
just did. Yes and no.
Yeah. Backspace is an interesting
one. We've we've had lots
of discussions about backspace. Oh,
that's a good point. Like
I just typed in ODU
and typed four characters to
get one, then hit backspace
and it backed up one
logical step rather than removing
the one logical. Yes. And
it depends. So if you
look at Chinese IMS, if
you type backspace after you've
committed your character, it actually
deletes the whole character and
you have to retype it.
Oh, okay. So it does
really depend on, on the
language and how it's working.
So yes, you do have
to maintain a stack or,
or have access to that
context. And that's also an
interesting story. Yeah. I could
definitely see how people, one
person could feel very passionately
that backspace should behave this
way. And other people might
say, Oh, no, of course
not. It's backspace is, is
undo. It's back up a
moment. Not back up everything.
Yeah. So the simple answer
I give to people now
is, well, if you're not
happy, you can create your
own keyboard layout, Which is,
which is interesting because that's
exactly what people do. You've
got, like you said, thousands
of keyboards lands. So you
said that when windows keyboard
a maker came along 10,
15 years ago, that that
was a, a moment where
you thought maybe this would
stop when windows seven, then
eight, the 10 of course,
you know that lots of
people, you know, hundreds, I'm
sure people at Microsoft are
trying to make as many
languages as possible work as
well as possible. And I
know that windows 10, for
example, included a lot of
really great new support for
Amharic ticketing and cause based
languages. But you, you, you,
there's no reason to stop.
Like you're saying that there's
still considerable value that came
in. Yeah. So there's two
different parts of that. Again,
one, now that it's a,
multi-platform it means that if
somebody does want to create
a layout for a language
they can do at once,
and it's going to work
on the majority of devices
out there, not just on
windows or not just on
Mac. And the other one
is because it's open source.
Now it wasn't, it wasn't
originally, but it is now
it means that, you know,
you've got that freedom, which
you don't necessarily have to
do what you want with
the keyboard. You're not necessarily
dependent on, on what Microsoft's
design choices are. And they
might be great design choices,
but they might not be
the ones you want And
it's not. And Microsoft and
windows itself, isn't for lack
of a better word, actively
trying to thwart this kind
of thing. Like it's, it's
okay to have different keyboards
and different plugins and the
ability to try to use
different stuff. That's not what's
out of the box. Yeah.
I've got a really great
relationship with a lot of
the guys and people at
Microsoft who have supported me
in the past, in developing,
came in and filling that
gap. And so I really
appreciate the work they've done
in terms of adding all
that extra support in windows
10. And then, and, and
there's a big issue there
in, in some ways, if
the need for key man
went away because the operating
systems did at all, that
wouldn't be a bad, Well,
I'd be a little sad.
I think if I had
spent 20 years working on
it, I might be a
little frustrated. Yeah. It's not
going away anytime soon, but
yeah. Well I think maybe
in 10 years, The ability
also to go to flicker,
for example, key man web,
then see a keyboard and
then drag a button to
your bookmarklets toolbar and then
suddenly use that keyboard in
your web browser is pretty
extraordinary. Yeah. That's one of
those interesting ones. That was
a, I think I did
that on an airplane trip
just for fun. And then,
and then I had to
support it, But you, maybe
you didn't think that was
the use case, but someone
said, Oh, this is perfect.
This is exactly what I
needed. I want to plug
my, you know, I'm doing
a blog just for people
who speak Amharic. Therefore I
want to make sure that
they can comment all I
have a browser add in
and a plugin for a
CMS or a web WordPress
that will allow anyone to
comment regardless of operating system
or any limitations that the
computer might have. Yeah. Yeah.
And there's a lot of
people who've who have done
that. I think we're based
keyboards also interesting because Google
now have quite a lot
available with, I think their
virtual keyboard. So there's a
bit of competition out there
for Kamen web, but there
still gets thousands of daily
visitors to the site. So
it seems like, So it's,
it's, we're using it. It's
free now and people are
using it thousands and thousands
and thousands and people can
go to key man, K
E Y M a n.com
or key man web.com and
they can download. And when
they're downloading it, they would
be downloading the keyboard for
their language. Can they download,
like if they were in
Belgium, they could download three
or four keyboards for the
three or four languages they
might speak or is it
one per download? They can.
So basically there's the engine
that came in app, which
they install first and then
they can add as many
keyboard layouts as they need.
So once you've installed the
app, you can just go
and add additional keyboard layouts
with, through, through the app
or through package people, package
files on the web. And
do I understand that you
just launched a beta of
a key man for Mac?
Yes. Yeah. So that's, it's
interesting because I feel like
we were going through the
same journey in undocumented space
with Kevin, from Mac, as
we did with Karen, for
windows. When we start to
work in, in for lack
of a better word, esoteric
languages, which offering system designers
haven't necessarily even imagined. And
the intersection of that with
the lower level keyboard input,
which is usually fairly lightly
documented, we run into all
sorts of interesting problems and
unexpected challenges and consistency issues
between applications and how people
deal with backspace and whether
they try and take over
and do their own thing,
that kind of thing. But
in the short term, your
goal, or maybe the longterm
goal is that the keyboards
that already exist are operating
system nonspecific. So if I've
got a keyboard, I'm developing
a keyboard, that's an existing
windows keyboard. For the most
part, I can just bring
that keyboard into the Mac
version. Yes. I think there's
any for the Mac. That's
very much true. There's I
think three or four keyboards,
which have Ima functionality, which
pop up user interface, which
would have to be rewritten
for Mac, but yeah, vast
majority are straight over. All
right. And all of this
is on GitHub at github.com/key
man app, correct? Yes. Fantastic.
I assume that you would
not be a, you would
not turn away good help
from smart people who might
want to get involved in
open source and get involved
with key man. I would
be very, very welcome. Yeah.
So we were a small,
small team as, as these
things always are and can
never do all the things
we want to do. Fantastic.
Well, if you speak another
language that is not English,
I would encourage you to
check out  dot com
and of course get hub.com/key
man app. Thank you so
much, Marc Durden for chatting
with me today. Well, thank
you. It's been a pleasure.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week. .